# Steps i went through to create a Mern-stack-app from scratch:

## Setting up the backend-server

1. ### Creating the server

    1. creating the http/tcp server using **createServer()** function from the http library on top of the request handler we named *app*.
    2. integrate the sockets using the Server() class and creating an object to handle the events.
    3. calling the middlewares && mounting the URL paths to the [Routes](./Steps.md:12:Routes) we have created:
    - `app.use("/api/messages", messagesRoutes);`
    - `app.use("/api/auth", authRoutes)`
    4. putting the server on the listening mode to start accepting request + connecting it to the **mongoDB**.

2. ### Creating Routes with the Router + middleware

    created using the **express.router()**, here exists the **router** that matches the **Endpoint** with **the middleware and the controller**(that handles Req/Res logic).

    ####  Routes Created

    `router.post("/signup", signup)`

    `router.post("/login", login)`

    `router.post("/logout", logout)`

    `router.put("/edit-profile", protectRoute, editProfile)`

    `router.get("/check", protectRoute, checkAuth)`

    #### Routes middleware

    **protectRoute()**: its a function that is run before the controller(that contains the main behaviour).
its use is to check if the client (is logged in) and (is a valide user) using the JWT.
    1. get the jwt from the request *cookies* header.
    2. decode it using the SECRET + jwt.verify() to get the userId from decodedJwt.userId.
    3. check if the user exists on the dataBase using the User model.

3. ### Creating Controllers

    #### 1. signup
    in this controller i do the following:
    1. parse the input from the req.body.
    2. return if the user already exists withing the database using the EMAIL.
    3. hash the password using **bcrypt()**.
    4. create user on the data base using the User model.
    5. generate the JWT token using **generateJWT()** and put it in the request header.

    #### 2. login
    in this controller i do the following:
    1. check if the user already exists in the data base.
    2. if it exists i get its data from the database.
    3. check if the password is correct using the **bcrypt.compare()**
    4. generate jwt for the user.

    #### 3. logout
    Delete the jwt from the request headers `res.cookie("jwt", "", { maxAge: 0 })`

    #### 4. edit-profile
    in this controller i do the following:
    1. get the profile picture from the req.body
    2. upload it to cloudinary `await cloudinary.uploader.upload(profilePicture);`
    3. update the database document of the user with the new photoo.

## Setting up the front-end side

1. ### Initing vite & tailwind

    Packages needed: `tailwindcss` + `daisyui`.

    **tailwindcss**: CSS framework.
    **daisyui**: Tailwind CSS plugin that adds pre-built UI components and themes.

2. ### Created front-end routes

    Packages needed: `react-router-dom`.
    **react-router-dom** just links a React component with an URL path, so that we can make a frontend router.

    Settings up client-side routing using React {Routes, Route}, where:
     - BrowserRouter enables URL tracking.
     - Routes matches paths.
     - Each Route maps a URL to a React component.

3. ### Connected front-end with back-end

    Packages needed: `axios` + `cros` + `zustand`.
    **axios** client object used to send http requests to the backend.
    **cros** to fix the cross-origin problem.
    **zustand** to create a global state that we can share easly to multiple components.

    1. On each refresh, i send a get request from the useEffect() hook to "/api/auth/check" route.
    >useEffect is a state i created using zustand to call this hook from any react component easly.

    2. then the `protectRoute` middleware from the backend is called the check if there is valide user sending the request by checking the jwt from the request `Cookie` header.

    3. if the jwt token is valide we send back to the front req.user *else* a throw is catched and we know that there is no user.

4. ### Protect routes based on the authentification status.

    We are doing so using the response we got earlier pinging /check from back-end. (userAuthObj)
    + Displaying spinner on page refresh.
    We are using conditional rendering.
        -> for example:
            if the the request containes this endpoint "http://localhost:5173/" but the user isn't yet logged in, we redirect him to the "http://localhost:5173/login" page.

5. ### Build signup page.

    Packages needed: `react-hot-toast` + `https://ui.shadcn.com/docs/installation/vite`.
    **react-hot-toast**: React library used to display notifications, temporary messages that appear on the screen.
    **https://ui.shadcn.com/docs/installation/vite**: importing local UI components and utilities generated by shadcn/ui.
    
    Setting up the front-end for the *Signup* + *Login* + *Navbar*.
    
    Handling the submit Button for Signup using *handleSubmit()* to parse the form data using *validateForm()*
    if the form data is valide -> *signup()* -> send the POST request:
    - `const res = await axiosInstance.post("/auth/signup", data)` -> to create a new user on the MongoDB.

6. ### Build login + logout page.

    #### login:

    - parse the login input onSubmit.
    - then i init the global state object *authUserObject* with the input that have been submitted.
    - then i call the action funtion from the global state *login* to send a POST request to: `/auth/login` to check if the user already exists or not.

    #### logout:

    - send POST request to the backend via `/auth/logout` to remove the JWT from the cookies.
    - init the global state variable *authUserObject* with null to target a re-render of the page -> then go to `/login` page.

7. ### Build Profile page (front-end) + link it with the backend.

    Tools needed: `Cloudinary`
    **Cloudinary**: Cloud service for storing images, it provides uploads API to make backend communicates with it.

    in this section: i handled client-side image upload in a React + TypeScript application.

    Prepared the profile page UI + with a custum label that contains `<input>` type of file, so we can click on it to chose the photo we want to use.
    when the button is clicked:
        -> i call the `handleImageUpload`
        -> get file from **e** object
        -> call the updateProfile() action that sends the PUT request to the "/auth/edit-profile" along with the picture *(to upload image to claudinary + update the DB)*.

8. ### Build the home(chat) page (Sidebar section)

    - inside the `<Sidebar>` component, im calling the getUsers() that sends a GET request using axios to this endpoint from the back-end "/api/messages/users"
    - the controller `getUsersForSideBar()`is called, i get the currect user, use the User model to fetch from the Mongo dataBase all the users except for me.
    - i get the response and update the users state variable using the set() function.
    - React re-renders Sidebar: Sidebar re-renders, now receiving the updated users array.

9. ### Build the home(chat) page (ChatContainer section)

    - **Messages input section:** Made a form the has 2 input fields:
        - Message input:            
            This is a controlled text field, means we integrate the a state variable (text) to store the input in it.
        - File input:
            call handleImageChange to read the file.
            set the state variable `imagePreview` with the selected image from the user.
        - Send button {type:submit}:
                its disabled if there is no `text || imagePreview`.
                calls the handleSendMessage() -> that sends the message to the backend controller + save message in the dataBase + Update message state (messages list)

10. ### Build the home(chat) page (Messages section)

    - import the messages state from the useChatStore.
    - call the getMessages via the useEffect() hook to update messages along with the selectedUser in the dependency array.
    - convert the messages object to jsx using *.map()*.
    - render the the array returned.

11. ### integrate WebSockets.

    * #### setting up online users:

        1. Frontend: create a socket for each logged in || signed up user using the `io()`
        2. Frontend: connect with the [server socket](../Backend/src/lib/socket.ts) and send the current authenticated user id.
        3. Backend: get the the current authenticated user id & add it to the onlineUsers array.
        4. Backend: broadcast custum event `xxxGetOnlineUsers` with the array to all connected users using the `.emit()`.
        > if an user is logged out - remove user from array + broadcast the updated array.
        5. Frontend: get the updated onlineUsers array in `checkAuth()`.
        6. Frontend: check if the each user is included in `onlineUsers` array.

    * #### setting up online users: